1.3 Data Fundamentals

Skills:
a. Apply data analysis and data modelling techniques, to design data structures based on business requirements
b. Use at least one conceptual data modelling technique (such as entity-relationship modelling) to capture the information requirements for an enterprise
domain.
c. Implement a database system using a mainstream database product such as Oracle or SQL.
d. Translate object and data models into appropriate database schemas within design constraints
e. Evaluate potential data solutions to meet requirements
f. Design high-quality relational databases.
g. Use the data definition, data manipulation, and data control language components of SQL in the context of one widely used implementation of the language.
h. Perform simple database administration tasks.


Knowledge and understanding:
a. Understand the role of databases and database management systems in managing organisational data and information.
b. Understand the historical development of database management systems and logical data models.
c. Understand the basics of how data is physically stored and accessed.
d. Understand the fundamentals of the basic file organisation techniques.
e. Understand the purpose and principles of normalizing a relational database structure.
f. Understand the concept of database transaction and apply it appropriately to an application context.
g. Understand the basic mechanisms for accessing relational databases from various types of application development environments.
h. Understand the role of databases and database management systems in the context of enterprise systems.
i. Understand the key principles of data security and identify data security risk and violations in data management system design.
j. Understand the core concepts of data quality and their application in an organisational context.
k. Understand what is meant by data warehousing and data mining.

List and explain the fundamental concepts of a relational database system.
Utilize a wide range of features available in a DBMS package.
Analyze database requirements and determine the entities involved in the system and their relationship to one another.
Develop the logical design of the database using data modeling concepts such as entity-relationship diagrams.
Create a relational database using a relational database package.
Manipulate a database using SQL.
Assess the quality and ease of use of data modeling and diagramming tools.
